---
title: Temperance Society
metadata:
    description: 
    keywords: 
    author: Brian Onang'o
---

# The Story of Captain Joseph Bates - Temperance Society

[248] We pass over the Christian experience of Captain Bates, introducing only those points that seem closely connected with **his advancement in moral reforms.** It is sufficient here to state that **in the fulfillment of resolutions made while on ship-board, he erected the family altar on his return home, and took the baptismal vow. At this time he suggested the first temperance society organized in that community**, of which he speaks thus:-

"The same day, while we were changing our clothes, I solicited **Elder M., who baptized me**, to assist me in raising a temperance society. As my mind was now free with respect to this last duty, I was forcibly impressed with the importance of uniting my energies with others, to check, if possible, the increasing ravages of intemperance. Since I had ceased to use intoxicating drinks, I was constrained to look upon it as one of the most important steps that I had ever taken. Hence I ardently desired the same blessing for those around me. Elder M. was the first person whom I asked to aid me in this enterprise; failing with him, I moved out alone, and presented my paper for signers. Elder G., the Congregational minister, his two deacons, and a few of the principal men of the place, readily subscribed their names, twelve or thirteen in number, and forthwith a meeting was called, and the 'Fairhaven Temperance Society' was organized.

"**The majority of our little number had been sea-captains, and had seen much of the debasing influence exerted by ardent spirits among its users, abroad and at home. They seemed the more ready, therefore, to give their names and influence to check this monster vice.** Elder G. exclaimed, 'Why, Captain Bates, this is just what I have been wanting to see!' The meeting was organized by choosing Captain Stephen Merihew
president, and Mr. Charles Drew secretary. Pending the discussion in adopting the constitution, it was voted that we pledge ourselves to abstain from the use of ardent spirits as a beverage. **Having no precedent before us, it was voted that rum, gin, brandy, and whisky were ardent spirits. Wine, beer, and [249] cider were so freely used as beverages that the majority of our members were then unwilling to have them in the list.** Some doubts arose with the minority whether we should be able to maintain the spirit of our constitution without abstaining from all intoxicating beverages. One of our members, who had always been noted for doing much for his visiting friends, said, 'Mr. President, what shall I do when my friends come to visit me from Boston?' 'Do as I do, Captain S.,' said another; 'I have not offered my friends any liquor to drink in my house these ten years.' 'Oh, you are mistaken,' said the president, 'it is twenty!' This doubtless was said because **the man had ceased to follow the fashion of treating his friends with liquor before others were ready to join him.**

"Inquiry was then made whether there were any temperance societies then known. A statement was made that certain individuals in Boston had recently agreed together that instead of purchasing their liquor in small quantities at the stores, they would get it by the keg, and drink it in their own houses. This association was called the 'Keg Society.' **If any temperance societies had ever been organized previous to the one at Fairhaven, we were unacquainted with the fact.** A short time after our organization, one of our number was reported to have violated his pledge. This he denied. 'But you were intoxicated,' said we. He declared that he had not drank anything but cider, and that
was allowed. We were told that his wife said she would a great deal rather he would drink brandy; for when he got drunk on cider he was much worse tempered. **During the trial of this member, he continued to declare that he had not violated the letter of the constitution. But it was evident to the society that he had violated the intent and spirit of it, which he was unwilling to admit, nor would he even promise to reform. He was therefore expelled.**

"**The society now saw the necessity of amending the constitution by striking out the words 'ardent spirits,' and inserting in their place, 'all intoxicating drinks,' or something [250] else that would sustain and aid the cause. From this a reform was introduced, which
finally resulted in the disuse of all intoxicating drinks, except for medicinal purposes.** This reform gave us the name of 'Teetotalers.'

"**Before this, our temperance society had become exceedingly popular. Our meeting-houses, in their turn, were crowded with all classes to hear lectures on the subject; and converts, both male and female, by scores cheerfully pledged themselves to the temperance constitution.** Many of the citizens of New Bedford who came to hear, also united with us. From thence a society was organized in their town, and in other
places also. Arrangements were soon made, and a Bristol County Temperance Society was organized. The Massachusetts State Temperance Society soon followed. **Temperance papers, tracts, and lecturers multiplied throughout the land, and opposition began to rage like the rolling sea, causing the tide of temperance to ebb awhile.** Then came the 'Cold-Water Army,' of little children from four years upward, commingling their simple little songs in praise of water, pure cold water - no beverage like unmingled cold water. Their simple, stirring appeals, especially when assembled in their society meetings, seemed to give a new impetus to the cause, and **re-arouse their parents to the importance of total abstinence from all intoxicating drinks.** As I examined my papers the other day, I saw the book containing the names of nearly three hundred children who had belonged to our Cold-Water Army at Fairhaven."

## Notes
